Source: International Atomic Energy Agency, U.S. Department of Energy
URL: https://www.iaea.org/newscenter/news/international-day-of-clean-energy-why-nuclear-power

Nuclear Energy and Climate Change

Nuclear power is one of the largest sources of low-carbon electricity in the world, second only to hydropower. Like hydro, nuclear power does not release any carbon during its use. Aside from its low carbon credentials, nuclear power has other features that further support energy supply security and the clean energy transition.

Nuclear power has the highest capacity factor of any power plant type at 92%, meaning nuclear plants operate at full power more than 92% of the time. This makes nuclear one of the most reliable sources of electricity available.

At COP28 in Dubai, leaders from 22 countries came together to sign a declaration to triple global nuclear energy capacity by 2050 to meet climate goals and energy needs. This demonstrates the growing recognition of nuclear power's role in fighting climate change.

Nuclear power offers large amounts of reliable, dispatchable power providing stability and resilience to the electrical grid and backing up variable renewables such as solar and wind when sunshine or wind are lacking. One large nuclear power plant can replace multiple coal-fired power plants to provide the same level of energy.

Energy-intensive industries, such as steel production, which use coal for heating and hydrogen production, could also be decarbonized using nuclear power, thanks to the ability of advanced reactors to produce high temperature steam.

Nuclear electricity production costs are less sensitive to changes in fuel prices than electricity from oil and gas. Uranium is available from a range of diverse producer countries, and is incredibly energy dense, meaning comparatively low volumes are required.

Advanced Nuclear Technology

Small modular reactors (SMRs) are nuclear plants of 300 MWe or less. SMRs have several advantages over large nuclear plants. Onsite construction of large nuclear plants can take many years and have associated cost overruns. SMRs will be factory-built and moved to the site by truck, railcar, or barge. SMRs employ economies of mass production rather than economies of scale.

The transition to carbon-neutral energy can best be made with advanced nuclear, providing safety, waste minimization, process heat for manufacturing, and a viable means of replacing our chemical manufacturing dependence on fossil fuels.

Nuclear vs Other Clean Energy Sources

To put the land use advantage in perspective, you would need more than 3 million solar panels to produce the same amount of power as a typical commercial reactor or more than 430 wind turbines. Nuclear energy requires relatively little land and fuel, and can operate continuously except for maintenance, refueling, and emergency shutdowns.
