Source: International Atomic Energy Agency, U.S. Department of Energy, Nuclear Energy Institute
URL: https://www.iaea.org/newscenter/news/what-is-nuclear-energy-the-science-of-nuclear-power

Source: International Atomic Energy Agency, U.S. Department of Energy, Nuclear Energy Institute
URL: https://www.iaea.org/newscenter/news/what-is-nuclear-energy-the-science-of-nuclear-power

What is Nuclear Energy?

Nuclear energy is a form of energy released from the nucleus, the core of atoms, made up of protons and neutrons. This source of energy can be produced in two ways: fission, when nuclei of atoms split into several parts, or fusion, when nuclei fuse together. The nuclear energy harnessed around the world today to produce electricity is through nuclear fission, while technology to generate electricity from fusion is at the research and development phase.

Nuclear fission is a reaction where the nucleus of an atom splits into two or more smaller nuclei, while releasing energy. Each time the reaction occurs, there is a release of energy in the form of heat and radiation. The heat can be converted into electricity in a nuclear power plant, similarly to how heat from fossil fuels such as coal, gas and oil is used to generate electricity.

Inside nuclear power plants, nuclear reactors and their equipment contain and control the chain reactions, most commonly fuelled by uranium-235, to produce heat through fission. The heat warms the reactor's cooling agent, typically water, to produce steam. The steam is then channelled to spin turbines, activating an electric generator to create low-carbon electricity.

Nuclear power plants do not emit greenhouse gases while generating electricity. They produce power by boiling water to create steam that spins a turbine. The water is heated by a physical process called fission, which makes heat by splitting apart uranium atoms inside a nuclear reactor core.

Nuclear Energy in the United States

Nuclear energy comes from splitting atoms in a reactor to heat water into steam, turn a turbine and generate electricity. Ninety-four nuclear reactors in 28 states generate nearly 20 percent of the nation's electricity, all without carbon emissions. These plants are always on: well-operated to avoid interruptions and built to withstand extreme weather, supporting the grid 24/7.

A typical nuclear reactor produces 1 gigawatt of power per plant on average. A single uranium fuel pellet, roughly the size of a gummy bear, contains as much energy as one ton of coal, 17,000 cubic feet of natural gas, or 120 gallons of oil.

Nuclear power plants avoid more than 430 million metric tons of carbon dioxide emissions each year, which is the equivalent of removing roughly 95 million cars from the road each year. It also avoids other harmful air pollutants, such as sulfur dioxide and nitrogen oxide, that lead to acid rain and smog.

Nuclear Energy's Role in National Security

Nuclear protects national security. U.S. leadership in nuclear energy maintains safety and nonproliferation standards globally and supports a resilient electrical grid at home. A strong civilian nuclear sector is essential to U.S. national security and energy diplomacy.

The Future of Nuclear Energy

The Energy Department's Office of Nuclear Energy's primary mission is to advance nuclear power as a resource capable of making major contributions in meeting our nation's energy supply, environmental, and energy security needs. By focusing on the development of advanced nuclear technologies, the Office of Nuclear Energy supports goals of providing domestic sources of secure energy.

Innovative entrepreneurs and startups are developing new types of reactors to be more efficient and flexible in operations, reach remote and developing areas, and provide industrial process heat. Advanced reactors include many types, including small modular reactors (SMRs) and microreactors now in development. These factory-built systems are expected to dramatically reduce construction timelines and make nuclear more affordable to build and operate.

At the forefront of advancing nuclear energy are laboratories like Argonne National Laboratory and Idaho National Laboratory. Scientists are investigating new reactor designs and fuel recycling technologies that can enhance safety, make nuclear plant operations more efficient, reduce the amount of nuclear waste, and reduce construction time and costs.
