Source: LinkedIn
URL: https://www.linkedin.com/company/nucube-energy/

NuCube Energy Funding and Company Background

NuCube Energy Raises $13 Million (February 19, 2026)

NuCube Energy, Inc. announced that it has secured $13 million in funding as surging electricity demand from artificial intelligence, manufacturing, and industrial reshoring intensifies the race to deploy next-generation nuclear technology in the United States.

Company Profile

NuCube Energy is a developer of compact solid-state fission reactor systems designed to provide long-term, on-site power generation for energy-intensive operations. The company's system delivers transportable small-scale reactors using proven materials, passive safety, minimal moving parts, and multi-decade core life, enabling industrial facilities, remote sites, and data centers to secure predictable high-temperature power at competitive, grid-independent costs.

NuCube Energy is headquartered in Idaho Falls, ID near Idaho National Laboratory. The company has approximately 10 total employees. NuCube Energy's primary industry is Energy Production. The company has raised $16.3M total.

Founding

NuCube was founded in 2023. An Idealab Studio company, NuCube cofounders include entrepreneur Bill Gross and Dr. Cristian Rabiti, a visionary innovator who has dedicated his career to advancing and reshaping the field of nuclear energy. Bill Gross is also the founder of Energy Vault and Heliogen, and serves on the Board of Trustees at Caltech and ArtCenter College of Design.

Dr. Cristian Rabiti previously served as VP of Business Development at Ultra Safe Nuclear Corporation, and held positions at Idaho National Laboratory and Argonne National Laboratory.

Investors

Investors in NuCube Energy include Arizona Nuclear Ventures, E8 (Seattle), Emission Reduction Corporation, Idealab X, Idealab Studio, Prime Movers Lab, Halliburton Labs, and Ecosphere.

DOE Programs

NuCube was selected under the Nuclear Energy Launch Pad (USA) program alongside other advanced nuclear companies. The company was also selected for GAIN vouchers to work with both Idaho National Laboratory and Argonne National Laboratory on different aspects of its reactor technology.
