Source: NuCube Energy Press Release and GAIN/INL
URL: https://gain.inl.gov/ne-25-36471/

NuCube Energy and Argonne to Validate Remote Operations for NuCube Microreactor Through FY 2026 GAIN Voucher (April 14, 2026)

NuCube Energy announced that it has been awarded a Fiscal Year 2026 Gateway for Accelerated Innovation in Nuclear (GAIN) Nuclear Energy Voucher on April 1, 2026 to support a project with Argonne National Laboratory focused on validating the remote operations model for the company's nuclear reactor design.

About the GAIN Voucher Program

GAIN voucher recipients do not receive direct financial awards. Vouchers provide funding to DOE laboratories to help businesses overcome critical technological and commercialization challenges. All awardees are responsible for a minimum 20 percent cost share, which could be an in-kind contribution. GAIN was established by DOE's Office of Nuclear Energy and provides the nuclear community with the technical, regulatory, and financial support necessary to move innovative nuclear technologies toward commercialization while ensuring the continued, safe, and economic operation of the existing fleet.

Previous GAIN Voucher (December 2024)

NuCube was also previously awarded a GAIN voucher in December 2024. NuCube Energy (Idaho Falls, ID) teamed up with Idaho National Laboratory to assess and optimize the performance of a heat exchanger conceptual design for potential use in a process that converts carbon dioxide gas into solid carbon, which can be used to develop materials for a variety of applications.

NuCube Energy Background

NuCube Energy, located in Idaho Falls, ID, seeks to transform how nuclear fission is used to power our society. NuCube focuses on addressing unmet needs for clean, carbon-free energy. Their vision is a world powered by small, safe, simple, and economical reactors that can provide electricity and process heat. Their mission is to develop simple and passively safe nuclear technology that enables this vision. Demonstration of nuclear process heating is critical to NuCube's technology development and business strategy.
