Source: NuCube Energy and Utah San Rafael Energy Lab Joint Press Release
URL: https://energylab.utah.gov/nuclear-energy/nucube-energy/

Utah San Rafael Energy Lab Signs MOU with NuCube Energy for Test Reactor (June 10, 2025)

The Utah San Rafael Energy Lab (USREL), a unit within the Utah Office of Energy Development (OED), and NuCube Energy (NuCube), an innovative nuclear energy company designing a revolutionary fission reactor capable of producing electricity and high temperature heat, announced the signing of a memorandum of understanding (MOU). The MOU establishes a collaboration for siting one of NuCube's microreactors at USREL, Utah's premier energy lab, located in Orangeville, Utah.

The MOU is a key step in bringing NuCube's modular reactors to market. NuCube's technology is capable of producing the highest-temperature heat from a fission reactor that can be easily integrated with chemical processes and energy conversion technologies. The reactors provide double value by generating electricity or providing heat for other industrial processes.

NuCube's reactor design utilizes TRISO (tristructural-isotropic) fuel and heat pipe technology, among other innovations, that are designed to minimize the use of moving parts within the reactor, thereby enhancing safety and reliability. The microreactors are housed in a stainless-steel compartment that increases safety and streamlines permitting. Testing of NuCube's microreactors at USREL will be the next step in the technology's development.

Unique in the industry, NuCube's nuclear reactor can produce electricity via high temperature heat greater than 1,000 degrees Celsius. It is the only reactor that can compete with natural gas for high temperature industrial customers. The technology can deliver cost competitive electricity and can also be operated independently from existing power grids, which could be transformative for rural areas in states such as Utah.

The MOU between USREL and NuCube comes at a time when the United States as a whole is seeing renewed interest in nuclear energy driven by both an increased need for more energy and newer and safer nuclear technologies. Utah has already begun attracting significant investment in its emerging nuclear industry, and the USREL will play a critical role in bridging the gap between research and development and deployment, including the NuCube project.

NuCube and USREL have already begun discussions about community outreach and engagement.

"Utah has an enormous amount of momentum as it explores how best to leverage nuclear energy to meet the needs of its residents and businesses," said Cristian Rabiti, Chief Executive Officer and Cofounder, NuCube Energy. "NuCube's innovative reactor is ideal for Utah and we're looking forward to bringing the highest temperature application for nuclear energy to the state for the first time. We are especially excited to be working with USREL given its proven track record of demonstrating advanced power generation technologies including a supercritical carbon dioxide power cycle."

About the San Rafael State Energy Lab: In 2023, management of the San Rafael State Energy Lab was transferred to the Utah Office of Energy Development. The lab fosters innovation and supports technological developments in the energy sector through community engagement and collaboration with industry leaders, researchers, entrepreneurs, investors and other stakeholders.
