Source: NuCube Energy Official Website
URL: https://www.nucube.energy/

NuCube Energy - Company Overview

NuCube is an innovative technology company designing a revolutionary nuclear fission reactor capable of producing electricity via high-temperature heat. The company's technology is capable of servicing both the electrical and the high-temperature industrial heat markets.

The Solution: A New Scale of Abundant Energy

Introducing the world's first solid state fission reactor that revolutionizes energy production. Compact enough to be transported via conventional road freight, this groundbreaking reactor provides facilities with a reliable and safe power supply of up to 15 megawatts. With a core life up to thirty years, the NuCube DeccaCell offers unparalleled cost-efficiency, competing with other energy sources.

A New Design for Nuclear

In the world of technology, miniaturization is the name of the game. The room-sized computer is now nano-scale, the telephone now fits in your pocket, and the once bulky screen is now wafer-thin. But nuclear energy has been stuck in the past for 60 years — clunky, unwieldy, and mechanical. Until now.

NuCube took the world's leading experts in nuclear fission and engineering and told them to start over. The result is a new category of high-performance and low-cost energy generation: Solid State Fission. Simpler and more reliable than anything that came before it.

Solid State Fission

With dramatically fewer moving parts the NuCube DeccaCell is passively safe, requires less capital and maintenance, expedites the approval process, and vastly improves efficiency.

Available and Proven Materials

By leveraging tried-and-tested off-the-shelf materials and fuel, the NuCube DeccaCell stands out as an affordable option for power generation. This innovative approach ensures a competitive edge in the energy cost race for decades to come.

More Applications and Usages

Solid State Fission is the only technology capable of operating at the high temperatures required to meet the demands of the vast industrial heat-use market.

Predictable and Reliable Energy

By decoupling energy supply from the overburdened and outdated grid systems, companies can predict energy costs for the next 30 years, ensuring a reliable power supply.

How It Works

1. Reactor is delivered via road or rail and rapidly installed on site.
2. A NuCube DeccaCell provides up to 15 MW of power for 7 to 30 years before refueling.
3. Once fuel is depleted NuCube DeccaCell is replaced and removed or refueled.

Regulatory

NuCube DeccaCell is revolutionizing the global energy landscape with its versatile fuel options and streamlined approval process. Not only is it ready to power the US, but it is also set to support many countries worldwide that have committed to the ambitious goal of tripling nuclear capacity in the next 25 years.

NuCube Team

Bill Gross - Founder, CEO of Idealab Studio, Co-Founder NuCube. Also Founder of Energy Vault, Founder of Heliogen, Board Of Trustees Caltech and ArtCenter College Of Design.

Cristian Rabiti, Ph.D., MBA - CEO and Co-Founder. Previously VP of Business Development at Ultra Safe Nuclear Corporation, Idaho National Laboratory, Argonne National Laboratory.

Mitchell Meyer, Ph.D. - Director, Nuclear Fuels and Materials. Previously Fuel Qualification Manager at Ultra Safe Nuclear Corporation, Idaho National Laboratory, Argonne National Laboratory.

Lorin Young, P.E. - Program Director. Previously Senior Project Director with Jacobs Engineering, Program Manager with CH2M Hill, Program Manager with Parsons.

Andrea Alfonsi, Ph.D. - Core Design Methods Manager. Previously Nuclear Design and Analysis Functional Manager at Ultra Safe Nuclear Corporation, Idaho National Laboratory.

Kais Kawar - Senior Mechanical Design Engineer. Previously Mechanical Engineer at X-energy, Corecentric Solutions, Fives Cinetic.

Partnerships and Alliances

- Halliburton Labs: NuCube has been selected to be part of the Halliburton Labs ecosystem.
- Energy Vault: Partnered to develop NuSun platform for Data Center market.
- Genium: Integrating systems and sharing information.
- Solid Carbon Products: Technology share agreement.
- Seerstone Development: Developing joint integrated systems.

Investors include Idealab X, Idealab Studio, Prime Movers Lab, E8, Halliburton Labs, and Ecosphere.

NuCube Energy is headquartered at 330 Shoup Avenue, Suite 200, Idaho Falls, Idaho 83402, with an additional office at 130 West Union Street, Pasadena, California 91103.

Contact: nucube@nucube.energy
