Source: U.S. Department of Energy, Office of Nuclear Energy
URL: https://www.energy.gov/ne/articles/big-potential-nuclear-microreactors

The Big Potential for Nuclear Microreactors

The U.S. nuclear energy sector is going through one of the most innovative and transformative times in its history. An entirely new class of advanced reactors will soon be coming in a wide variety of sizes and applications. More than 20 U.S. companies are working on designs that are smaller, scalable, versatile and even mobile — providing far greater access to nuclear power than ever before.

Microreactors will likely be the first advanced reactors to enter the U.S. market. Domestic reactor developers are currently working on gas and heat pipe-cooled designs that could debut by the mid-2020s.

Microreactors are simply smaller, factory-built systems that can be easily transported by trucks, ships, airplanes or railcars. To put it simply, microreactors can operate in places large reactors can't. They provide choice to customers that need a constant and reliable source of clean power without the costs of a large construction project.

Microreactors are ultra-hardened, ultra-safe and highly efficient systems that can operate for 10 years or more without refueling. Many companies are looking at the diesel generator market as one possible entry point. Remote areas and even U.S. military bases are at risk to supply chain disruptions and high energy costs that could leave them without power if a shipment is missed. A microreactor eliminates this risk by providing fuel security and emissions-free electricity around-the-clock for years to come without interruption.

Nuclear microreactors are a type of nuclear reactor which can be easily assembled and transported by road, rail or air. Microreactors are 100 to 1,000 times smaller than conventional nuclear reactors, and range in capacity from 1 to 20 MWe (megawatts of electricity), compared to 20 to 300 MWe for small modular reactors (SMRs). Due to their size, they can be deployed to locations such as isolated military bases or communities affected by natural disasters. They can operate as part of the grid, independent of the grid, or as part of a small grid for electricity generation and heat treatment.

One of the key features of nuclear microreactors is their small size and modularity. They can be built in factories and shipped to their final destination, reducing construction costs and time. They can be installed underground, underwater, or in other remote locations, making them ideal for powering small communities, industrial sites, military installations, and other specialized locations. In addition, the modular design allows for easy scalability, allowing additional microreactors to be added to increase power output as needed.
